Phillips, “Skin and Bones” 24

Skin and Bones: The Decimation of the Plains Buffalo
Nancy Phillips
In the 16th century, North America (Turtle Island) was home to 25 to 30 million buffalo roaming
freely on the Great Plains, but only a few hundred remained by the end of the late 19th century. The aim
of this paper is to investigate the historic perspectives and evidence to answer the question “what
happened to the buffalo?” Academic debates have surrounded this question since the 19th century; while
blame has been assigned to different parties, nobody has taken full credit for the ecocide. I will examine
different perspectives and contributors to the decline of the buffalo and discuss why nothing was done to
salvage the great herds. Indigenous people of the plains hunted buffalo for subsistence long before any
European had stepped foot in North America. After European contact, ecological changes, species
pressure, and disease created tension between the buffalo herds and threatened their survival. However,
the dramatic decrease of the buffalo population is ultimately attributed to human agency. Unofficial
military policy, sport-hunting, and a capitalistic hunger for resources brought the once plentiful herds to
near extinction in just a few decades. Both the American and Canadian governments encouraged the
decimation of the buffalo as a solution to the “Indian problem,” as Indigenous people were thought to be
more malleable without their main source of subsistence. Fundamentally, the means by which the buffalo
were slowly eradicated from the Great Plains had a profound influence on the lives of Indigenous peoples
and offers an insight into Indigenous-Settler relations during the 19th century.
There is often conflation between the terms ‘bison’ and ‘buffalo.’ In North America, the accurate
scientific genus term is Bison bison. For the purposes of this paper however, the term ‘buffalo’ will be
utilized rather than ‘bison’ due to the prominence of ‘buffalo’ in the available literature and its dominance
in oral tradition. The majority of texts on the decline in plains buffalo numbers are American sources
since the Canadian government was newly created in 1867 and did not possess the manpower to effect
vast environmental change. The literature on buffalo in the 19th century is split between two primary
camps: the preservationists who were interested in ‘saving’ the buffalo from extinction, and frontier
historians.1 Both groups however “analyzed the near-extinction and preservation of the species from the
perspective of dynamic Euroamericans who shaped a passive nature and overwhelmed culturally static
Indians. Both interpretations also saw the near-extinction of the bison as the inevitable triumph of
Euroamerican society.”2 The belief that Indigenous people were more ‘primitive’ than Europeans was
used to justify colonialism and the treatment that Indigenous people received on part of the newcomers.
The rationale was that, if Europeans were inherently superior to Indigenous people and the notion of
Manifest Destiny was true, the slaughter of the buffalo and by extension the destruction of Indigenous
ways of life was somehow acceptable in Western consciousness.
Environmental factors may have initiated the decline in the buffalo, even before Euroamericans
waged war on the sacred animals. Signs of drought pushed the carrying capacity of the land, putting
1

Andrew Isenberg, The Destruction of the Bison: An Environmental History, 1750-1920, (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2000), 5.
2
Isenberg, The Destruction of the Bison, 5.

Mount Royal University Humanities Review, Vol. 5

Phillips, “Skin and Bones” 25
pressure on the species and increasing the presence of pests like grasshoppers. 3 According to
dendrochronological evidence, the second quarter of the 19th century showed increased rain followed by
an extensive drought which would have restricted the subsistence resources of the buffalo.4 It is possible
that diseases such as anthrax, tuberculosis and brucellosis spread rapidly between the herds and there is
evidence that these diseases caused a decline in buffalo populations due to spontaneous abortion.5 To
assume that environmental changes had no effect on the buffalo population is also to assume that they
lived in an unchanging world. Most environmental historians understand nature as possessing its own
agency and is inherently prone to unpredictable changes in climate.6
The decline of the buffalo influenced directly by human agency began long before the height of
the buffalo slaughter in the 1870s. During the fur trade in Canada, there was a heightened demand for
buffalo robe coats and pemmican (a mixture of pounded meat, berries and fat that could be stored and
taken with fur traders into the bush). As in other places in Canada, once plentiful buffalo, thought to have
an eternal supply, were hunted in large numbers to satisfy consumer demands. Indigenous peoples
increased in number on the plains and utilized more efficient hunting techniques brought by Europeans.7
Suddenly, Indigenous people not only hunted for their own people, but they also supplied the newcomers
with food and robes to help them survive the harsh winters.8 We cannot assume that Indigenous people
lived in a harmonious relationship with all animals, at all times, either – to do so is to imagine these
interactions as static, unchanging and romanticized. However, even though hunting of the buffalo during
the fur trade increased, leading to a slight population decline, the vast majority of buffalo were killed in
the decades following the American Civil War.
Though no official commands were put forward by the American or Canadian governments to
encourage the slaughter of the buffalo, there is extensive evidence suggesting that mass hunting was
encouraged to clear the plains, of both the buffalo and Indigenous people. Generals William T. Sherman
and Philip Sheridan played integral roles in the eradication of the buffalo and both held the view that
people should “Kill every buffalo you can! Every buffalo dead is an Indian gone.”9 The governments on
both sides of the Medicine Line had determined that there was an ‘Indian problem:’ Indigenous people
that were viewed as standing in the way of progress and civilization had to be eradicated. Government
officials knew that many of the plains nations depended heavily on the buffalo to provide all items
necessary to remain independent without much involvement of the State. Missionary John McDougall
wrote about the Blackfeet in 1865 that “without the buffalo they would be helpless, and yet the whole
nation did not own one. To look at them and to hear them, one would feel as if they were the most
independent of all men; yet the fact was they were the most dependent among men.”10 Government
William Doback, “Killing the Canadian Buffalo, 1821-1881,” in Canadian Environmental History: Essential Readings, ed.
David Freeland Duke (Toronto: Canadian Scholars’ Press, 2006), 242.
4
Doback, “Killing the Canadian Buffalo,” 243.
5
Doback, “Killing the Canadian Buffalo,” 243.
6
Isenberg, The Destruction of the Bison, 11.
7
Colin Calloway, Our Hearts Fell to the Ground: Plains Indian Views of How the West Was Lost, (Boston: Bedford/St.
Martin’s, 1996), 122.
8
Calloway, Our Hearts Fell to the Ground, 122.
9
David Smits, “The Frontier Army and the Destruction of the Buffalo: 1865-1883,” The Western Historical Quarterly 25,
no. 3 (1994): 328.
10
Isenberg, The Destruction of the Bison, 66.
3

Mount Royal University Humanities Review, Vol. 5

Phillips, “Skin and Bones” 26
officials understood that the most efficient way of solving their ‘Indian problem’ was to eradicate
Indigenous peoples’ primary subsistence source. Colonel Nelson A. Miles writes that, “this might seem
like cruelty and wasteful extravagance but the buffalo, like the Indian, stood in the way of civilization
and in the path of progress, and the decree had gone forth that they must both give way” – both the
buffalo and the Indigenous people stood in the way of the plains truly opening up. 11 Lieutenant Colonel
Dodge recalled an interaction he had with a “high ranking officer” in the 1870s who said:
There's no two ways about it, either the buffalo or the Indian must go. Only when the Indian
becomes absolutely dependent on us for his every need, will we be able to handle him. He's
too independent with the buffalo. But if we kill the buffalo we conquer the Indian. It seems
a more humane thing to kill the buffalo than the Indian, so the buffalo must go.12
The involvement of the American military in the eradication of the buffalo came in several forms.
President Abraham Lincoln signed the Pacific Railway Act of 1862, and in 1869 the Transcontinental
Railroad was completed. The creation of the railway played an integral role in the extermination of the
buffalo (and of the Indigenous people who relied on the buffalo) due to the increased access it allowed,
the transportation of goods, and the splitting of the great herd into Northern and Southern herds. 13 The
railway hired hunters to kill buffalo in large numbers to feed tracklayers, such as the famous William
“Buffalo Bill” Cody who was hired in 1867.14 During his time working for the Union Pacific Railway,
Cody was credited with killing 4,280 buffalo in less than eighteen months and was bestowed the
nickname of “Buffalo Bill” which stuck with him for the rest of his career.15 There are accounts of hunters
boarding the trains and firing at will from the locomotive at the great herds, though some military
personnel like Lieutenant Colonel Albert Brackett devalued this form of hunting and compared it to
hunting cattle.16
In 1868 General Sheridan encouraged ‘sportsmen’ of England and America to participate in a
‘Grand Buffalo hunt’ to wipe out the buffalo and the ‘Indians’ in a single sweep.17 The military organized
buffalo hunts for high ranking visitors when they visited America. For example, a hunt took place in
January 1872 for the Grand Duke Alexis third son of the Czar of Russia, and within five days the hunting
party had slaughtered hundreds of buffalo.18 Often times, these hunters (nicknamed ‘pot-hunters’) took
only the tongues and humps from the buffalo and left the rest of the carcass to decompose. In 1870,
General John Pope requested twelve dozen buffalo tongues and sent Lieutenant Colonel Richard Dodge
with a squad of marksmen to fulfill the order.19 It is said that “in three days they returned with a wagon
filled with more tongues than were ordered. To kill over 144 buffalo, animals that could weigh over 2000
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 333.
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 332.
13
Valerius Geist, Buffalo Nation: History and Legend of the North American Bison, (Stillwater: Voyageur Press, 1996), 97.
14
Geist, Buffalo Nation, 81.
15
Geist, Buffalo Nation, 81.
16
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 326.
17
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 316.
18
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 316.
19
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 320.
11
12

Mount Royal University Humanities Review, Vol. 5

Phillips, “Skin and Bones” 27
pounds each, solely for their tongues, which weighed an average of two pounds apiece, was justifiable
to those frontier soldiers who considered the herds expendable.”20 On another occasion in 1871 several
prestigious businessmen visited Fort McPherson and the party killed over six hundred buffalo within a
few days, utilizing .50 calibre shots, taking the tongues and choice cuts while leaving the rest to rot.21
John Palliser, whose memory is kept alive by places like the Palliser Hotel and who is credited with
assisting in the opening up of the West for settlement, also engaged in extensive buffalo hunts in 1847
and ’48 in Montana.22 There is some evidence that the Canadian North West Mounted Police also
participated in these grand Buffalo Hunts, though there is not extensive literature on this topic. There are
also accounts of the American military encouraging their soldiers to go out and hunt buffalo as target
practice, en masse, because it “broke the monotony of the daily routines of the campaign or post, [and]
provided good exercise for the men and horses.”23 The military, though not ‘legally’ involved in the
beginning stages of the slaughter of the buffalo did have a significant role to play in encouraging
sportsmen and other military personnel to indulge in mass hunts.
Though subsistence and sportsmen hunting damaged the herds, the real spike in the decimation
of the buffalo did not occur until 1871 with the discovery of a new tanning practice to turn buffalo hides
into useful leather. Buffalo leather was “in demand for the belting needed for the machinery of an
expanding industrial complex” in both Europe and America. 24 With the presence of the railway,
thousands of people made their way to the Great Plains to slaughter and skin buffalo for their hides, every
hide worth between $1 and $3.25 For every person assigned to shoot, two people were required to skin
the animals. It is said that “the smell of death seemed to hang in the air on the ‘firing range’”.26 Between
1872 and 1874 it is estimated that close to three million buffalo were slaughtered in Kansas alone. When
they disappeared the hunters turned south towards Oklahoma, Texas and New Mexico.27 Luther Standing
Bear, who grew up in a traditional Lakota way of life, recalls “I saw the bodies of hundreds of dead
buffalo lying about, just wasting, and the odor was terrible” and that “we saw bale after bale of buffalo
skins, all packed, ready for market. These people were taking away the source of the clothing and lodges
that had been provided for us by our Creator, and they were letting our food lie on the plains to rot. They
were to receive money for all this, while the Indians were to receive only abuse.”28 The buffalo who had
been in slow decline for years were suddenly being killed in the thousands with their corpses left to rot
on the plains. The number of hides sold to the I.G. Baker Company located at Fort MacLeod in the years
1874-1879 show the peak and decline of the availability of the buffalo. In 1874 the company marketed
250,000 hides while in 1877 they marketed only 30,000; in 1878 there were 12,797 hides and by 1879

Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 320.
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 316.
22
Grant MacEwan, Buffalo: Sacred and Sacrificed, (Edmonton: Alberta Sport, Recreation, Parks and Wildlife Foundation,
1995), 41.
23
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 319.
24
Tom McHugh, The Time of the Buffalo, (New York: Alfred A. Knopf Inc., 1972), 253.
25
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 326.
26
MacEwan, Buffalo, 59.
27
Scott Taylor, “Buffalo Hunt: International Trade and the Virtual Extinction of the North American Bison,” The American
Economic Review 101, no.7 (2011): 3171.
28
Calloway, Our Hearts Fell to the Ground, 125.
20
21

Mount Royal University Humanities Review, Vol. 5

Phillips, “Skin and Bones” 28
the number had fallen to 5,764 hides.29 It is evident that the American military under command of General
Sheridan encouraged and enabled hide hunters to annihilate the buffalo to solve the ‘Indian problem’,
though there has never been any military records endorsing the mass slaughter.30 The southern herd was
destroyed in the early 1870s and the northern herd disappeared between 1876 and 1883.31 Kiowas Elder,
Old Lady Horse, remembered that:
The white men hired hunters to do nothing but kill the buffalo. Up and down the plains
those men ranged, shooting sometimes as many as a hundred buffalo a day. Behind them
came the skinners with their wagons. They piled the hides and bones into the wagons until
they were full, and then took their loads to the new railroad stations that were being built,
to be shipped east to the market. Sometimes there would be a pile of bones as high as a
man, stretching a mile along the railroad track.32

Figure 1 Buffalo Bones ready for loading on Canadian Pacific Railway Boxcar, Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan33
An aging Cree man is credited with saying that, “they took our land, they plundered our soil; they
would have killed the last beaver if they could have found it; they destroyed the buffalo that was our food
and took everything they could sell. They left only the bones, but wait and see what comes next; as soon

29

MacEwan, Buffalo, 63.
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 334.
31
Calloway, Our Hearts Fell to the Ground, 123.
32
Calloway, Our Hearts Fell to the Ground, 129.
33
O.B. Buell, “Buffalo bones ready for loading on Canadian Pacific Railway boxcar, Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan,” photography
(ca. 1887-1889), from The Glenbow Museum, Archive Photographs, JPEG files, File number NA-4967-10.
30

Mount Royal University Humanities Review, Vol. 5

Phillips, “Skin and Bones” 29
as they find out how to sell them, they’ll be back to get the bones too”.34 Inevitably, they found a market
for the bones. After the vast majority of buffalo were killed and their bodies had been left to rot on the
prairies, all that remained was a great expanse of bones. It was discovered that bleached bones could be
used in the manufacturing of phosphate fertilizers and in the creation of charcoal filters that were
necessary for the refining of sugar.35 The buffalo bone trade began in Canada around 1883, though it took
hold in Kansas much earlier, when the Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR) was able to offer pick up spots
for the bones from several collection points along the tracks.36 Major collection points on the Canadian
side were Regina (nicknamed ‘Pile of Bones’) and Moose Jaw at first, followed by Swift Current,
Medicine Hat and Calgary. 37 Many Métis and homesteaders participated in the collection of the bones,
brought by cart to the collection points to be exchanged for cash – in 1885 in Moose Jaw the price was
$7 per ton.38 Bone gatherers would set fire to the prairie grass in early spring or late summer, leaving the
bones clearly visible on the black earth allowing for easier pick up. 39 Peak years for the buffalo bone
trade were between 1891 and 1892, during this time train freight cars in constant use could not keep up
with the demand. Hundreds of thousands of skeletons were piled up on either side of the railway awaiting
shipment and the most famous photos of piles of buffalo skulls were taken at the peak of the bone trade.
Ultimately the bone trade only lasted around 10 years due to a finite amount of resources (the buffalo
were almost extinct by this point) and changing industrial methods for resource extraction required
different materials.40
The policies put in place to eradicate the buffalo, though never explicitly made legal policy in
America or Canada, were ultimately intended to fix the so called ‘Indian problem’. Officials knew of the
link between Indigenous Nations like the Arapahos, Assiniboines, Atsinas, Blackfoot, Cheyennes,
Comaches, Crows, Kiowas and Sioux peoples and a dependency on the buffalo. The ultimate goal for
the governments on both sides of the Medicine Line was to force Indigenous people to settle onto reserves
and open up the plains for Settlers and agriculture. Indigenous people were to be contained and
‘civilized’. General Sherman remarked that “the quickest way to compel the Indians to settle down to
civilized life was to send ten regiments of soldiers to the plains, with orders to shoot buffaloes until they
became too scarce to support the redskins.”41 In the Canadian context, when the hide hunters were at
their peak in the United States, the newly formed government attempted to extinguish Indigenous title
and cede land through the implementation of the Numbered Treaties. In Treaty 7 territory, it is often
remembered that the last buffalo were seen shortly after the signing of the Treaty on September 22, 1877.
Annie Buffalo from the Piikani Blackfoot reserve recounts that “I did not know the buffalo, but I heard
the stories from my Elders. They said that the buffalo disappeared shortly after the signing of the treaty…
the old people said that the white people took away all the buffalo.” 42 To the government it appeared
34

MacEwan, Buffalo, 167.
MacEwan, Buffalo, 167.
36
MacEwan, Buffalo, 167.
37
MacEwan, Buffalo, 168.
38
MacEwan, Buffalo, 168.
39
MacEwan, Buffalo, 171.
40
MacEwan, Buffalo, 171.
41
Smits, “The Frontier Army,” 318.
42
Richard T. Price, "Interviews with Elders," in The Spirit of the Alberta Indian Treaties, 3rd ed., ed. Richard T. Price
35

Mount Royal University Humanities Review, Vol. 5

Phillips, “Skin and Bones” 30
that starving ‘Indians’ were also controllable ‘Indians:’ people came to the reserve to receive rations, but
in 1884 a quarter of the Blackfeet died of starvation over the winter.43 According to Crow Elder, Pretty
Shield, once the buffalo were gone “sickness came, strange sickness that nobody knew about, when there
was no meat”.44 Sitting Bull is credited with saying that “A cold wind blew across the prairie when the
last buffalo fell – a death wind for my people.”45 Crow chief Plenty Coups stated that “when the buffalo
went away the hearts of my people fell to the ground, and they could not lift them up again. After this
nothing happened. There was little singing anymore.”46
Fundamentally, the means by which the buffalo were slowly eradicated from the Great Plains
profoundly influenced the lives of Indigenous peoples on the land and offers insight into IndigenousSettler relations during the 19th century. Whether through the means of subsistence hunting, military
involvement, sport hunting, or capitalistic ventures, the eradication of the buffalo on the plains was a
devastating period in human history. The forced annihilation of 25 to 30 million animals in a few short
decades wreaked havoc on Indigenous communities on both sides of the Medicine Line. An investigation
into the reasons behind the disappearance of the buffalo from the plains offers a unique insight into the
mindset of the American and Canadian governments in their dealings with Indigenous people and
ultimately reaveals their methodology to solve the ‘Indian problem’.

(Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 1999), 142.
43
Calloway, Our Hearts Fell to the Ground, 123.
44
Calloway, Our Hearts Fell to the Ground, 131.
45
Calloway, Our Hearts Fell to the Ground, 123.
46
Calloway, Our Hearts Fell to the Ground, 123.

Mount Royal University Humanities Review, Vol. 5

Phillips, “Skin and Bones” 31
Bibliography
Buell, O.B. “Buffalo bones ready for loading on Canadian Pacific Railway boxcar, Moose Jaw,
Saskatchewan.” Photograph. 1887-1889. From The Glenbow Museum, Archive Photographs.
JPEG files. File number NA-4967-10.
Calloway, Colin. Our Hearts Fell to the Ground: Plains Indian Views of How the West Was Lost. Boston:
Bedford/St. Martin’s, 1996.
Doback, William. “Killing the Canadian Buffalo, 1821-1881.” In Canadian Environmental History:
Essential Readings, edited by David Freeland Duke, 239-257. Toronto: Canadian Scholars’ Press,
2006.
Geist, Valerius. Buffalo Nation: History and Legend of the North American Bison. Stillwater: Voyageur
Press, 1996.
Isenberg, Andrew. The Destruction of the Bison: An Environmental History, 1750-1920. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000.
MacEwan, Grant. Buffalo: Sacred and Sacrificed. Edmonton: Alberta Sport, Recreation, Parks and
Wildlife Foundation, 1995.
McHugh, Tom. The Time of the Buffalo. New York: Alfred A. Knopf Inc., 1972.
Price, Richard T. "Interviews with Elders." In The Spirit of the Alberta Indian Treaties, 3rd Edition, edited
by Richard T. Price, 128-143. Edmonton: University of Alberta Press, 1999.
Smits, David. “The Frontier Army and the Destruction of the Buffalo: 1865-1883.” The Western
Historical Quarterly 25, no. 3 (1994): 312-338.
Taylor, Scott. “Buffalo Hunt: International Trade and the Virtual Extinction of the North American
Bison.” The American Economic Review 101, no.7 (2011): 3162-3195.

Mount Royal University Humanities Review, Vol. 5

